hey everyone this is Laszlo Montgomery
coming to you as usual from the China
History podcast.com got a lot to cover
today so let's just get right into it by
hook or by crook I'm going to finish off
this history of Hong Kong series in this
episode the events that went down in
1966 and 67th the Star Ferry and leftist
riots where all the government needed to
know that something had to be done this
matter of how big of a social safety net
should be provided always challenged
leaders from ancient times and into
today
well 1966-67 Hong Kong finally was
reaching that tipping point the go-go
1960s had raised Hong Kong's economy to
the next level and the way things were
looking they were locked and loaded and
ready to reach new heights of
achievement and prosperity in the 70s
the working poor were willing to keep
their traps shut in the 50s because they
all knew in those tough times everyone
had to sacrifice but not now
everyone could see the good times were
rolling how come they weren't getting a
piece of the action
the 66 and 67 riots showed the
government that with all this newfound
and harder and prosperity they had to be
a little less stingy with those who
couldn't get in line at the buffet table
Governor David Trench tried to be the
one to carry out these reforms in the
mid 60s but as we mentioned last time he
got all swept up in the chaos that hit
Hong Kong hard during the 67 riots in
the aftermath to some extent he was able
to prime the pump a little for his
successor sir Murray Mackel hos Lord
Mecca lows he was the 25th governor
there are only three more who will
follow him he served ten years in six
months making him Hong Kong's
longest-serving governor beating out the
22nd governor Sir Alexander Grantham by
one month the makkal hos era of the 70s
and up to 1982 truly was a turning point
in the history of Hong Kong when looking
back on the signature achievements made
during the governorship of Murray Mackel
hos from November of 1971
May of 1982 I guess the main ones were
the establishment of the ICAC nine year
free compulsory education the
far-reaching government housing programs
the establishment of the new towns of
shatin tan moon and Tai Po and others
that followed all he did for the
establishment of country parks where
Hong Kong people could escape the urban
sprawl the MTR the cross Harbor tunnel
all happened during his watch the MTR
opening in October 79 and the cross
Harbor tunnel in August of 72 and the
whole matter of 1997 that since the turn
of the century in 1900 seemed so far far
away was now coming in fast from the
distance this elephant in the room had
gotten so big
booked China and Britain bided their
time and waited for the other to broach
the subject though many advised against
it it was Murray Mackel hoes who would
be the one to raise the issue of the
lease first and that in turn led to the
whole concatenation of events that led
to the signing of the joint declaration
in 1984 basic law in 1990 and the
handover on June 30th 1997 so before I
get too far ahead of myself let's go
back to the day Murray Mackel hos came
to town the early seventies to set the
stage had a lot going on especially with
respect to China 71 and 72 saw the whole
drama with ping pong diplomacy secret
meetings between Kissinger and premier
Joe Nixon's visit in February of 1972
during the week that changed the world
Vietnam the Cold War the Cultural
Revolution winding down the old guard of
China revolutionaries were passing away
one by one and the US was abandoning
their stalwart friend in Taiwan when
Lord makkal hos sat himself down behind
the governor's desk for the first time
history was being made all around him in
the earliest moments
when the PRC stepped onto the world
stage in 1972 Kwong Wah said at the UN
the question of Hong Kong and Macau
belonged to the category of questions
resulting from the series of unequal
treaties which the imperialists imposed
on China Hong Kong and Macau are part of
Chinese territory occupied by the
British and Portuguese authorities the
settlement of the question of Hong Kong
and Macau is entirely within China's
sovereign right and does not at all fall
under the category of colonial
territories covered by the declaration
on the granting of Independence to the
colonial countries and people the
Chinese government has consistently held
that they should be settled in an
appropriate way when conditions are ripe
Prime Minister Heath and foreign
secretary Sir Alec douglas-home took no
action against what Wan hua said and to
not say anything to counter such a
declaration in diplo speak is tantamount
to saying hey man I hear ya so right
there back in 1972 there was no secret
where China stood on the issue and you
can forget about any chance of renewing
that lease on the New Territories for
another 99 years Britain cozied up more
with China announcing that embassies
were gonna be set up in London and
Beijing this didn't happen overnight and
was the culmination of two decades of
discussions but the timing was excellent
the usual boilerplate material was
placed in the formal document that
maintained that both sides agreed to the
principles of mutual respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity
this carried a particular amount of
weight in this case because of the Hong
Kong issue so this is when some serious
consideration began to be given to the
whole 1997 issue up to now no one had
said anything about it and if neither
side raised the issue that officially
the issue didn't exist so as far as hong
kong in a matter of the lease on the new
territories coming due in 1997
out of sight out of mind but not really
it was very high on the minds of both
sides after the 1967 riots the British
knew with a degree of certainty there
was no way in the world they could
defend Hong Kong against China this
didn't mean they were ready to throw in
the towel but history was now on China's
side
China could come in anytime any day and
just smash and grab the whole territory
now the thing Britain can do in fact all
China had to do was turn off the water
supply and that would be all she wrote
so trying to define China militarily and
hide behind the opium war and post opium
war treaties and try to win in the world
court of public opinion was not going to
be a good strategy there were a lot more
things at stake for Britain than simply
the future of Hong Kong as a British
possession yes China was slowly getting
up off its knees from the after-effects
of the Cultural Revolution there was
talk going around that the future
potential of China is a world commercial
and trading powerhouse that you know
although not now might one day offer all
kinds of opportunities for British
companies
so although 1997 hadn't been on the
table yet both sides had to privately
start preparing for it
one important little bit of business
that had to be addressed was right of
abode in Britain yet about 3.3 million
Hong Kong Chinese and the thought of all
of them picking up and moving on masse
to England was a frightening thought to
many the immigration ordinance 1971 took
care of that that little bit of
legislation closed the door for right of
abode in Britain to anyone except those
with a direct personal or ancestral
connection with Britain
so not unless you had some sort of link
to Britain by birth adoption
naturalization or were children or
grandchildren of such persons yet better
make other plans
some say this was the first move made
that led Hong Kong people to believe in
the earliest days that Great Britain
didn't have any plans for Hong Kong
beyond 1997
this sort of served as the initial
warning bell at China was taking over
right around the time of the immigration
ordinance of 1971 Murray Mackel hose
came to town this was in November 1971
and the 23rd of that month the PRC slid
into the seat previously occupied by the
Republic of China government at the
United Nations Nixon's visit was only a
few months away from here on out what
Beijing was thinking was going to be
central to whatever discussions went on
between China and the UK for this reason
the next three governors beginning with
Murray Mackel hose were all bona fide
sinologists who had worked their way up
through the Foreign Service
these were Mackel hos Edward yo'd and
David Wilson these three all knew how
the game was played with China and
weren't so beholden to politics and how
decisions made out in the Far East were
received back home Mackel hose came in
and began changing the tone immediately
this guy was different from the previous
24 governor's going back to Pottenger he
earned his stripes right out of the
starting gate as far as being viewed as
a man of the people he didn't go in for
all the trappings of the office and
besides dressing like a normal guy would
often choose to walk to meetings rather
than take a car with a whole entourage
in the 1971 Hong Kong annual review
which is sort of a State of the Union
address the priority areas called out
for reform and expansion were in Water
and Power education health and housing
housing was the biggest crisis at the
moment always had been too many people
and not enough dwellings to fit them in
even after the shek Kip may fire in 1953
there were still thousands and thousands
of squatters those who were able to get
off the mountainside and into some sort
of government subsidized housing ended
up in these 120 square foot concrete
boxes were five adults were expected to
live no bathroom facilities you had to
use the equivalent of unnecessary but
you know a lot of times if you just
money at a problem it starts to fix
itself and that's what happened here
between nineteen seventy and seventy two
government expenditures increased over
fifty percent part of the plan to
ameliorate the housing problem was to
build these satellite towns out in the
new territories typos and shatin were
picked as to centers of gravity where
these towns would be built around
further to north of the new territories
saw massive expansion of housing and
shun Shui and fondling in the western
part of the territory
jin-hwan and ton moon also saw a lot of
high-rises going up within 25 years more
than two and a half million people moved
into this housing it's still going up as
we speak and there's still a shortage
but not anything like the sixties and
before the housing reforms initiated by
governor makkal hose began the MTR was
set up in 1975 the D shot Lagoon sue
this company was created to deal with
the issue of mass transit so this mass
transit railway corporation MTR C which
today is one of the most profitable and
admired public transport systems in the
world
it started off small running only
between shacket May and Glen Tong in
East Kowloon but it brought immediate
relief to a lot of people and into the
1980s and 90s there has been non-stop
expansion not all went according to plan
there was a stock market crash in March
of 73 that put a damper on things but
the territory was able to bounce back
from that August 1971 saw typhoon rose
this was the worst one to hit since
typhoon Wanda in 1962 yet a hundred and
seventy five mile-per-hour winds and six
point three inches of rain 5,000 were
left homeless one of the Hong Kong Macau
ferry sunk bringing 88 people down to
Davy Jones locker
all in all 110 people lost their lives
in August 1979 came typhoon hope 100
people lost their lives in that storm of
course this kind of weather was all
normal stuff going
for a century and a half since the
colony was founded in 1974 Chinese
became the official language together
with English it's hard to believe with
over 98% of the populace speak in
Cantonese everything in the government
was in English in 1974 it was declared
that quote both languages possess equal
status and enjoy equality of use for the
purposes of communication between the
government and members of the public now
this all made it official but in
practical terms it took a long time to
get this implemented and only by 1989
when I moved out there laws began to be
issued in both languages for the first
time another of Murray Mackel hoses
signature achievements during his time
in the governor's mansion was the
establishment of the ICAC
the Independent Commission Against
Corruption known today as the Lian Chung
Gong shil corruption was pretty bad
coming out of the 1960s anything could
be had for a price
the Triads were paying every cop off and
the man on the street found he couldn't
work the government system without the
constant need to pay chach yen or
t-money to some bureaucrat it was pretty
bad and no one was doing anything about
it
mainly because so many profited from the
system it was so entrenched in Hong Kong
society no one could ever get anything
done without putting up with this
systemic extortion sometimes it merely
takes an incident of some sorts and then
the whole rotten system just collapses
on itself
there was this brouhaha that went down
called the Godber scandal Peter Garber
was a policeman's policeman decorated
for his bravery during the 67 riots this
guy was chief superintendent and second
in command in Kowloon he was big and he
was powerful and during the course of
his work in the Royal Hong Kong police
he managed to salt away hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of dollars in
overseas accounts April 1973 the month
the World Trade Center in New York City
opened word leaked out about mr. Gaad
birth and he got wise to the authorities
that they were on to him so he
uses his connections and security
clearances to fly the coop he escapes
and the government is massively
embarrassed by this scandal this Boulder
unleashed an avalanche of public outrage
so the government was forced into action
because of the uproar governor Mackel
hos called for an inquiry which finds
indeed there be some intense corruption
on a systemic scale just as everyone
thought and this my friends leads to the
creation of none other than the ICAC
the Independent Commission Against
Corruption the very capable Sir Jack
cater was put in charge as the founding
Commissioner he had made his way up the
ranks in Hong Kong since 1946 it was a
very respected figure he left his mark
in Hong Kong history thanks in part to
his early stewardship of the ICAC
as he can imagine plenty of people
weren't too keen on something like this
and there were plenty of vested
interests who required a lot of pressure
and persuasion before they would bend to
the will of this powerful and very
independent commission hey they clean
the place up well not perfect Hong Kong
is now one of the least corrupt places
around the ICAC is catching people all
the time and I'm sure a lot of public
servants and businesspeople think twice
before making a deal with the devil
anyways the ICAC report corruption
hotline is and remains to five to six
six three six six make that call if you
have someone to report Peter Garber was
later captured and tried in 1975 he
served four years and so well did the
ICAC do and rounding up all the bad
apples in the end they had to offer a
kind of an amnesty to those whose crimes
weren't as egregious as the worst but
most of the big fish got caught and had
to pay their debt to society in one form
or another the important point was that
the place was cleaned up and most all of
the weeds were removed I'll tell you it
was things like this that we credit
Murray Mackel hose for he ushered in and
managed a nice decade of stability and
growth and for the first time in Hong
Kong history the folks on the lower
strata of society got some relief from
the government and some hope for the
future in the form of education for
children and grandchildren believe me
plenty of moms dads grandpas and
grandmas ended up okay in the winter of
their lives thanks to kids and grandkids
who got a free basic education and went
on to build a career and were able to
support their families
it's hard to fathom how much education
can contribute to society just needs to
percolate for a decade or two before you
see the obvious results so the 1970s and
into the 80s saw reforms in the civil
service and in almost all of the public
services public housing was going up
everywhere and this would soak up about
40% of the population one day transport
was improving the MTR was expanding
always then to create some grassroots
involvement with the government district
boards were established in the eighteen
districts of Hong Kong there were local
councils and served as consultative
bodies these worked well and are also
credited to governor makkal hos the
people now had a direct link to the
government to converse whatever it was
that was on their mind
so these years were something and of
course you had Bruce Lee during this
period of hong kong history the big boss
1971 fists of fury and way of the Dragon
1972 Enter the Dragon 1973 in the
posthumously released Game of Death 1978
Bruce Lee of course passed away
tragically a few months shy of his 33rd
birthday in Kowloon Tong on July 20th
1973 he was also from this time the 70s
and 80s also saw another kind of
transformation taking place in Hong Kong
this was the emergence of many new
Chinese tycoons these were different
than the Robert ho Tom's the Tong shook
in zosyn Chows those early
multimillionaires were part of the
British Hong Kong establishment and in
most cases either worked for them or
owed some degree of their prosperity or
position in Hong Kong society to the
British these new guys did not they were
all men who fled China for one reason or
another Japanese and
Asian civil war famine the two most
famous were probably YK pow and lee
kai-shing and as if to show that the age
of British dominance was over you also
saw the emergence of the big mega China
companies in Hong Kong
these were China merchants Steam
Navigation good old Jiao Zhang Jie Jie
pond
the Bank of China China resources and
siddik to name a few these companies
were immensely powerful and influential
because of their links to the China
government the British firms like HSBC
Jardine's Hutchison Whampoa Swire dairy
farm Hong Kong land these guys all had
these intricate interlocking
directorships and the directors were on
each other's boards this old boy network
consisted of Etonians and grads from
Cambridge and Oxford in Hong Kong they
all hung out at the Hong Kong Club the
Yacht Club and of course the Royal Hong
Kong jockey club theirs was a solid
impenetrable fortress but sure enough
come 1980 that impenetrable fortress was
indeed penetrated now I know if you're
not interested in business this story
might not mean anything to you but I
assure you when it was all going down it
was sending shockwaves through the Hong
Kong business community there was this
firm Hutchison Whampoa they've been
around since the 1860s so I guess you
could call them part of the Hong Kong
corporate establishment elite to make a
long story short they sort of went on a
spending binge in the 70s and I guess
you could say they overdid it they got
themselves in a little bit of hot water
and were heavily overextended the
company was left with no alternative but
to call their good buddies at HSBC Hong
Kong Shanghai Bank and ask them to bail
them out of their situation
so HSBC went in and reorganized things
set the place straight and took a 22%
stake in the company and then on
September 25th 1979 at the close of
trading in London Hong Kong Bank
announced they were selling their 22%
stake in Hutchison to none other than
mr. Li Cushing's flagship company Chong
Kong for
Ultra bargain-basement price of 639
million Hong Kong dollars today
Hutchison employs over a quarter million
employees in 54 countries their
businesses include ports property hotels
retail energy and telecom very big 30
billion dollar company very profitable
li kai-shing who we featured in CHP
episode 13 ran from China in times of
great chaos and came to Hong Kong where
today he's considered by all to be the
territory's most celebrated success
story
HSBC you see they were clearly placing
their chips on rising Chinese tycoons
like li kai-shing they were turning away
from their old chums and the British
establishment and cultivating a new and
much more potentially profitable wave of
newcomers they saw what was happening in
China and knew the time had come to
start making friends with these rising
stars so when they put their chips on li
kai-shing it was a very smart move li
kai-shing went in and took over
Hutchison Whampoa and brought in mr.
simon murray and the rest i will
encapsulate by saying was history li
kai-shing wasn't the only hong kong
chinese on the prowl for prized british
assets also in 1979 YK Pao backed by
hsbc seized control of the kowloon wharf
and go down and later on 1985 YK Pao
took over another of the great pillars
of Hong Kong corporate society this was
Wheelock in company they've been around
since 1857 which qualifies them as a
pillar they're a heavy duty mover and
shaker in the property market not only
in Hong Kong but in Singapore as well
and to the man on the street we know
them as the company behind lane Crawford
City super Joyce and the cable services
they provide to the territory Hong Kong
was no longer simply a trading and
manufacturing center it was now growing
to be a world financial center as well
this is another change that began in the
1970s and into the 80s in 1984
Jardine's one of the founders of Hong
Kong if there ever was one move their
domicile to Bermuda which signaled the
beginning of a disengagement from Hong
Kong now in 1995 they will send a formal
apology to China for this vote of
no-confidence in Hong Kong's future
under China they at the time Jardine's
move out of the territory was considered
a big slap in the face to China because
for such a high-profile company as
Jardine's to bail a man it may try to
look bad and they later on taught
Jardine's upper management who was boss
so it was a completely different dynamic
now in 1980s and 1990s Hong Kong it was
as if the place had shed its skin of
being a British colony and had now
become its own man the place had grown a
new identity and was unrecognizable to
its former colonial self the Cultural
Revolution was finished and the dung era
was in full swing special economic zones
of Shenzhen and Zhuhai attracted
thousands and thousands of Hong Kong
investors like my former boss who set up
their manufacturing across the border
the future wasn't looking so bad but the
nagging 1997 question as each day passed
and everyone got closer to that date the
parlor game of guessing what was gonna
happen got more and more intense every
conceivable scenario was discussed but
the truth remained dumb shale pings deal
team in this matter
held all the cards and China played
their hand well there was a consensus
that believed Britain should say nothing
after all China wasn't bringing up the
matter there was this belief that the
status quo might possibly be able to be
maintained in that if the British side
never raised the issue the Chinese
wouldn't say anything either but Joe and
I had made it clear back in 1971 that
Hong Kong was coming back to China in
1997 in Edward Heath yes taxman mr.
Heath he let it be known back in 1982
that Britain was well aware of the
situation and wasn't gonna make any
waves dung had told him clearly
nothing would change in Hong Kong he
said quote in our Chinese Constitution
there is a provision that we can
establish special administrative regions
with rules separate from the rest of the
country hey now said but aside from all
these unofficial pronouncements and
loose talk nothing had been discussed or
worked out yet and so the whole topic
was still rife with speculation
one could say Britain hadn't done too
shabby of a job managing Hong Kong
especially after the makkal hos reforms
there was quite a bit of consensus out
there that believed that even after
China resumed sovereignty they might
request Britain to stay and continue
their stellar job of administering the
territory towards the end of the 1970s
and into the 80s the subject of 1997 was
getting more and more attention it got
to the point where property investors
and they were a very powerful lot those
guys started to make waves about
obtaining financing on deals that
straddled 1997 the banks were quite
hesitant to offer any financing on
anything that had life beyond 1997 after
all no discussions had been made with
China on the subject one might speculate
that whatever contracts were signed
before 1997 would still be valid after
1997 but no one knew for sure it came to
a point where too much business couldn't
be transacted gotta remember Cultural
Revolution ended in 1976 and back then
people still believed China was capable
of anything
you just couldn't predict and in the
late 70s and early 80's young Xiao
Qing's reforms were just getting started
and no one knew yet what we know now so
with all this uncertainty now affecting
business as usual the Hong Kong
government in the Foreign Office felt
they couldn't wait around it forever
someone had to take the massive risk of
speaking up first which in the Chinese
negotiation system sometimes implies
weakness a break came in early 1979 when
the Ministry of Foreign Trade invited
governor makkal hos to come to Beijing
to discuss trade projects
this was something Britain was hot about
is up till now the two way trade between
Britain and China was anemic at best
this was an opportunity to advance the
future prospects of British trade with
the new China
accompanying governor makkal hose was
none other than Percy Craddock he was a
long-serving diplomat in sinologist who
remember in August of 1967 when the Red
Guards attacked the British
representative office in Beijing Percy
Craddock was part of the gang up there
who got all manhandled and roughed up he
served as British ambassador to China
from 78 to 83 he will play a major role
from this point forward until 1997
so this visiting delegation they had
their meetings and got to have some time
with the great man dong Xiao ping March
24th 1979 is the initial meeting and
done lets them know man these words were
so important they couldn't have come
from anyone else's lips he said that
whatever happens in the end Hong Kong
must be under Chinese sovereignty met
for a considerable time to follow into
the 21st century
nothing would change in Hong Kong and
capitalism can continue on there same as
before
China would continue to carry out their
economic system side by side okay well
now that that one was out of the way and
the door was closed locked key put away
for safekeeping
there still remained the hope that the
British could continue on in Hong Kong
in some administrative role but rather
than risk overstepping their bounds they
didn't broach the subject they asked
instead about the matter of how to
handle loans
straddling 1997 for example funding for
the MTR and for the new airport was
difficult without knowing what China's
position was Dungey sure him no one had
anything to worry about so that went
well this cryptic message was taken back
to Hong Kong was rather well received
especially by the business community
China was still being coy about the
whole matter but at least signals were
being sent out that suggested business
would be allowed to prosper without
any kind of interference from China
things begun to heat up in 1982 Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher fresh from
victory and the Falklands thought now is
the time to take this whole matter of
1997 on the people of Hong Kong waited a
high degree of trepidation the British
wanted to appear strong and didn't want
to have anyone pointing fingers at them
saying they sent the people of Hong Kong
up the creek without a paddle
the people of Hong Kong had high
expectations and there was major concern
about how everyone might fear under
China management compared to how the
British maintained things the spectrum
of feelings among the populace went from
extreme patriotic pride about the
takeover to share an utter dread and
talk of abandonment of Hong Kong and
moving elsewhere and then there was
everything in between as well you know
in one form or another the countdown to
June 30th 1997 had been going on since
June 9th 1898 when they inked the
convention between Great Britain and
China respecting an extension of Hong
Kong territory aka the second convention
of peking that treaty i believe also got
filed in the unequal drawer
who knew way back in 1898 china and its
weakest the manchu court at its most
rotten foreigners doing whatever they
wanted without recourse japan suddenly
so powerful out of nowhere this was
quite an intense moment for everyone I'm
sure and now all these decades gone by
and over the past however many episodes
we looked at how this whole Hong Kong
story unfolded so 1982 that dynamic is
way changed from 1898 to say the least I
might add but Prime Minister Thatcher
she felt she was on a roll after the
Falklands War and in 1982 the you know
the Soviets were bogged down in
Afghanistan in the US was embroiled in
the iran-contra Nicaragua hearings and
you know still cleaning up from the
Vietnam War and the Cold War was you
know still going on still let a few more
strong years to go yet
now the bigger picture for China was the
unspoken matter of Taiwan if China was
able to pull off this Hong Kong deal and
the right
balance was struck between the people's
continued freedoms and quality of life
and all that entails that made
unification with Taiwan that much easier
Hong Kong was to be the model that was
show Taiwan hey what are you guys so
scared about so it was of the most
extreme importance to the Chinese side
not to botch this whole thing it got off
to a horrible start and from about
September 82 right up until 1997 this
was one for that history books I'm going
to spare you all the agonizing details
and back-and-forth sparring between the
Chinese and British sides at times the
negotiations were excruciating so let's
just look at the big picture and not get
too bogged down in the details mrs.
Thatcher when she had her sit-down with
Tong Xiao Peng on September 24th said in
so many words I got these hair treaties
and they say you know when thunk Xiao
Peng wouldn't hear any of this and
couldn't believe that for a side like
Great Britain that wasn't even holding a
pair of two's how can she come out this
strongly and not only that how dare she
bring up these unequal treaties that you
know China signed under duress so with
the tone set it didn't go all together
too well and at the farewell banquet
mrs. Thatcher threw in Beijing dung
didn't even go he went to one for Kim
il-sung instead he sent John Sooyoung to
go represent him he could imagine how
the Hong Kong people felt about all this
watching the news on TVB and a TV every
night it was like a rollercoaster with
too many emotional ups and downs the
late David Bonavia wrote quote mrs.
Thatcher left the next day somewhat like
one of those typhoons which run in from
the western Pacific leaving a trail of
destruction behind them seldom in
British colonial history was so much
damage done to the interests of so many
people in such a short space of time by
a single person most Hong Kong people
had nowhere to go no relatives in
Australia or Canada or wherever to help
them out no financial means to pick up
and go elsewhere most people were stuck
there and they were anxious to get the
best
they could and they had no seat at this
negotiating table whatsoever so far the
prevailing attitude was Britain was
going to take care of Britain and the
Hong Kong people were in one form or
another gonna be abandoned and left to
their own devices with China who in 1982
was still only six years out of the
Cultural Revolution and with the
negotiations just started already there
was so much disappointment the Hong Kong
stock market tanked Prime Minister
Thatcher dug in her heels and gotten
nowhere finally in February 1983 China
let it be known they have their own
unilateral plan in the works an almost
complete and would be announced in
September 84 the governor by now is
another wise China hands Sir Edward
yoda-like Mackel hose he had earned his
stripes in China and spoke the language
there were two camps the sinologists
like Craddock Mackel hose Yoda and
Wilson who all suggested one course of
action in dealing with China and the
other side led of course by mrs.
Thatcher who felt they had to play it
tough it got so bad that Yoda and
Craddock flew to London in March of 1983
and told the Prime Minister she had to
back down once common ground and the
most basic points was finally reached
between Britain and China and agenda was
agreed to that would first look at how
to arrange and ensure stability and
prosperity in Hong Kong after 1997
second how to handle the lead-up to 1997
and third the matter of sovereignty so
after 10 wasted months since mrs.
Thatcher's disastrous first visit the
ball got rolling the China's deal team
was of course dung calling all the shots
assisted by John Sooyoung and Li
xiannian the main point man in Beijing
was cheap Hong Fei and in Hong Kong they
sent the likable and respected Shuja
tone it was up to Xu Jia tune to listen
to as many voices as possible from all
walks of life in Hong Kong and to report
back to dung about the general mood
when he delivered the report the dung
Shou pain it could have been summed up
in one sentence date on licker trust us
too much Li xiannian decided then that
China had to do something to win the
trust of the Hong Kong people meanwhile
the negotiations were going nowhere
round after round with Britain still
trying to hold on to administering Hong
Kong after 1997 finally in the sixth
round they backed down and then things
began to make progress after 12 rounds
of talks finally they had a deal for sho
the British were going it might not have
been the decision everyone wanted but at
last everyone knew with certainty what
was decided on that score the Chinese
spelled it out in the joint declaration
when they said quote the government of
the PRC declares that to recover Hong
Kong including Hong Kong Island Kowloon
and the New Territories hereinafter
referred to as Hong Kong is the common
aspiration of the entire Chinese people
and that it has decided to resume the
exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong
with effect from July 1st 1997 into that
the British countered with quote the
government of the UK declares that it
will restore Hong Kong to the PRC with
effects from July 1st 1997 now keep in
mind all the negotiations were between
Britain and China and every time the
Hong Kong people would try to get a word
in edgewise you know from the governor
to exco and all down the line Dunc made
it clear they had no voice this was
between Britain and China only this was
always a source of great frustration for
the Hong Kong people that they had to
sit back and let their fate always be
decided by others they didn't have any
voice in the matter when it was all over
and all the details have been worked out
the British Foreign Secretary Geoffrey
Howe flew to Hong Kong and announced
that the administration of Hong Kong
would transfer to China but Hong Kong
would continue its same economic and
social systems and would maintain their
present autonomy good news all around
the stock market promptly rose
and erased all the losses suffered since
the first Thatcher visit on December
19th 1984
child's a young and Margaret Thatcher
signed the joint declaration and the
deed was done but the quote from Frank
Walsh's book the history of Hong Kong
page 513 talking about signing the
sino-british joint declaration on the
future of Hong Kong quote it was
certainly the result of much patient
negotiation which reflected great credit
on all those concerned nothing quite
like it had ever been done before an
agreement to transfer a territory with a
population greater than Norway Israel or
Ireland not as a result of war and
without the people concerned having any
direct say in the matter an agreement in
which China undertook to retain laws
customs and a social system alien to her
own and to allow freedoms denied to her
own people to those living in Hong Kong
well once the document got into the
hands of the Hong Kong populace you
better believe it was dissected down to
the molecular level there was plenty of
fault and weaknesses found but all in
all it wasn't bad and looking back 25
years after the fact you could say it
worked out quite well and none of these
worst-case scenarios happened next step
was the writing of the basic law this
would be the constitution for Hong Kong
as all this was being hashed out the
mood in Hong Kong was dismal so much was
being handled behind closed doors within
three years of the signing of the joint
declaration all the good feelings had
evaporated and the mood was soured due
to all the uncertainty still it took
another thumb shopping moment to sweep
away the uncertainty when he went before
the fourth plenary session of the basic
law drafting committee and spoke without
notes saying that China was sticking
with socialism and their current system
in the interest of maintaining momentum
for growth and opening up to the outside
world Hong Kong's basic political and
administrative policies would not change
for 50 years
he also said for
all these years Hong Kong had always
operated under Great Britain and
therefore to expect the place to adopt a
British or American style democracy was
unrealistic as far as personal freedoms
dung said Hong Kong people could still
criticize the CCP as long as they don't
turn their words into actions
worst case China would use troops well
he didn't mince any words and the public
reacted favorably anything that filled
the vacuum of uncertainty was always
positively viewed better to know the
worst than to know nothing you know
thunk shell ping had trained his entire
life under Chou Enlai
when this great moment was thrust upon
him he handled it confidently and deftly
so that's how the whole Hong Kong SAR
came about the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region equally under one
country two systems' next step as I said
was to write the basic law this was the
job of the National People's Congress
the Hong Kong people as usual not
involved and there came to the fore a
man by the name of Martin Lee Lee Joon
mean he was the Benoit for China and all
pro China forces in Hong Kong he began
making a lot of noise once he was able
to obtain a platform in the government
he got on the basic law drafting
committee but later on he's gonna be
asked to leave he became one of the
flagship liberal progressive Democratic
voices for Hong Kong more about Martin
Lee in a minute something went down on
June 4th 1989 that really caused a lot
of headaches in Hong Kong the ax tnmn
incident caused a predictable uproar in
Hong Kong this was a massive body blow
to the often shaky confidence of the
Hong Kong people you know what they were
thinking they saw those tanks rolling
down Chang'an Avenue and they were
thinking that could be Queens Road
central one day so this caused a massive
hit to the whole matter of the countdown
to the handover nobody saw this coming
and it couldn't have exploded at a more
sensitive time for the Hong Kong people
despite June 4
and all the aftershocks the event caused
in Hong Kong the basic law still got
hammered out and was signed with much
pomp and ceremony in the Great Hall of
the people it became official on April
4th 1990 and of course went into effect
as soon as the takeover happened but
June 4th was a confidence killer too
many people clamored for special BN o
passports that gave them a way out if
worst came to worst the years right
after June 4th saw a lot of people
scrambling for ways out and seeking out
passports as a safety net the worst
however was over by 1992 and migration
began to settle down after that these
were the days when Vancouver was being
invaded in all these tiny countries that
no one had ever heard of before we're
offering passports to anyone who came up
with the pretty green and into all this
this new loud cry for democracy and
direct elections walked Hong Kong's last
governor we know him today is the Lord
Paton of burns the chairman of the BBC
Trust and from July of 1992 - June 30th
1997 he served as the 28th and final
governor of Hong Kong
I lived there in Hong Kong during the
entirety of Chris Patton's run as
governor and I can only recall that he
couldn't thumb his nose and stick his
finger in China's eyes enough
I remember those years as some of the
most acrimonious I ever witnessed
between China and a foreign power
basically from about 1971 until then in
1992 China got lucky the governors who
served during that time makkal hos yode
and Wilson all spoke Chinese were also
knowledge Asst and to a man were
considered too soft and too
accommodating to China that's open for
debate but they always believed things
should be handled discreetly and within
the Chinese context then in comes Chris
Patten who was out to teach China a
lesson and came in like a bull in a
china shop no pun intended and stirred
things up like you can't believe in the
closing years leading up to the handover
Chris Patten was gonna champey
reforms that would lead to the ultimate
thing China didn't want directly elected
legislators China liked it the way it
was the deck was stacked in a certain
way so that they always had a certain
amount of control over the outcome but
if all of a sudden you transferred this
power all to the people
well that was frowned upon and this is
exactly what Chris Patten tried to do
and the Chinese just went crazy
you see the June fourth incident it
changed the dynamic and the whole mood
in Hong Kong if not for that if not for
June fourth it's likely governor Patton
would never have dared to be so bold
with his reforms reforms that by the way
China said they would dismantle the next
day after they took over
I remember the delay and the
construction of the new airport all due
to these arguments going on finally in
September 1991 with great fanfare and
MOU was signed and work could begin at
last on that great airport we all know
and love those of us who use it that is
but it was endless stuff like this Hong
Kong authorities in China were just
constantly taking swipes at each other
and all these voices from China would
say the most belligerent things that was
just freaks some of the Hong Kong people
outs in the first Hong Kong elections
that had a very diluted form of
democracy it saw all the pro-democracy
candidates of Martin Lee's United
Democrats when 18 directly elected seats
the pro-beijing candidates all did
poorly and this of course sent a bad
signal to Beijing the United Democrats
had a lot of support but not much
influence and of course the officials in
China you know scoffed at the election
and said yeah the NPC still had final
say-so who cared how many seats the
United Democrats won you know a lot of
people in China and all over were saying
if bringing this kind of democracy was
so great for the people of Hong Kong how
come the British in over 150 years never
once felt it necessary to introduce it
why suddenly was it a paramount
importance and what about the 1971
Immigration Act that more or less said
no Chinese allowed so I can tell you
there was plenty of mudslinging on both
sides and the whole matter was
motive and monopolize the news for
almost all the years leading up to 1997
despite all this Hong Kong's economy was
booming manufacturing had turned the
whole region from dong-gwon in China to
the north all the way down to Hong Kong
in the south it turned it into one
single product development merchandising
and manufacturing megalopolis by the mid
90s almost everything you saw in the
stores made in China came from this one
single region while you had all this
open warfare between the governor and of
course is enabler Prime Minister John
Major you also had the Hong Kong economy
firing on all cylinders now we'll have
the Asian financial crisis but that
doesn't really blow up in everyone's
faces until after 97 not only was
Britain fighting with China about this
even inside fortress Britain there was
infighting Percy Craddock representing
the sinologist faction you know who
urged moderation and sticking to the
joint declaration was in a constant
pitched battle with the governor me and
those two did not like each other and
didn't hide their distaste Percy
Craddock said quote the reforms in the
manner of their promulgation represented
a 180-degree turn in British policy on
cooperation and convergence the fact
that the US Canada and Australian
governments warmly endorsed the
governor's constitutional plans
confirmed Beijing's
instinctive suspicion that there was
international backing for such a plan
where did big business stand on these
issues hey they were always on their
side and their side unanimously advised
not to piss off Beijing they all felt
what was the use of sticking your finger
in China's eye over these reforms that
everyone knew would be quashed
this was China took over the 1991
elections gave a lot of people the
confidence that they could change things
but in fact they couldn't it got so bad
that China's man in Hong Kong at the
time Liu ping he simply said if Britain
is reneging on this whole joint
declaration we'll just start setting up
our own parallel government and on July
1st 97 we'll just pull out yours and in
ours when the next set of elections were
held in September 95 the United Dems
again had a strong showing somehow
everything managed to stay together and
on the evening of June 30th 1997 they
had the handover ceremony at the new
wing of the Exhibition Centre Prince
Charles was there and got severely
rained on that afternoon when he read
the farewell speech on behalf of his
mother the Queen Jen sameen flew in for
the occasion they rushed the opening of
Hong Kong Airport to ensure it was ready
in time for receiving the president of
China what a disaster that opening was
and then there was a fireworks show to
end all firework shows maybe the Beijing
Olympics topped it not sure I watched it
all on TV with my children and opted not
to fight the crowds that night and then
the next day on July 1st 97 it's just
like any other nothing changed and it
only got better in my worthless opinion
anyway now when I say nothing changed
there actually was some change Hong
Kong's elected legislature was abolished
just as Beijing said it would do and a
Beijing appointed body of lawmakers took
its place some civil liberties were
rolled back he had to jump through a few
hoops to protest and hold rallies but it
wasn't outlawed but any form of speech
promoting the independence of Taiwan or
Tibet was banned 156 years of British
rule ended no one could say they didn't
do a magnificent thing with Hong Kong it
truly was in some sense of the phrase a
barren Rock with hardly a house upon it
when they found it so Chris Patten
sailed away on the Royal Yacht Britannia
and dongji WA became the first chief
executive the new HKSAR and I promise in
25 years we're gonna revisit the subject
and do an overview of Hong Kong since
1997 this is going to conclude our
little history of Hong Kong overview man
that was a rush to the finish wasn't it
I know but you have to admit you all
know a lot more about Hong Kong today
than you did four months ago
yes Robert L packet himself always says
I hope you enjoyed that there's a lot
more to the history of Hong Kong than
what I covered in these ten parts for
example we didn't even go into any
detail about the role of YK Pao leading
up to and immediately after the signing
of the joint declaration I'm waiting to
get a copy of anisole men's book on her
father and then I plan to do a podcast
on YK Pao using that book as the primary
source I know I skipped over a lot but I
was anxious to get this all finished off
in this tenth episode I think he got the
main idea about those final years before
the handover it was quite a beginning
and quite an ending those 156 years of
British rule